Add "How to estimate gas" page (#134)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: arbitrum-docs/devs-how-tos/how-to-estimate-gas.mdx

We will first break down the formula mentioned in the Medium article, moving then to where to get the information of each variable, and finally seeing an example of how to apply the formula in your code as well as other practical ways of estimating gas costs.

However, if you want to jump straight to the code, we have created [this script in our tutorials repository](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/arbitrum-tutorials/tree/master/packages/gas-estimation) that goes through all the calculations explained in this how-to.

## Breaking down the formula

As explained in the Medium article, the transaction fees to pay at any given moment are the result of the following product:

```
Transaction fees (TXFEES) = L2 Gas Price (P) * Gas Limit (G)
```

This Gas Limit includes the gas of the L2 computation and an additional buffer to cover the gas to be paid when posting the batch including this transaction on L1.

```
Gas Limit (G) = Gas used on L2 (L2G) + Extra Buffer for L1 cost (B)
```

This buffer takes into account the cost of posting the transaction, batched and compressed, on L1. This L1 posting cost is calculated as follows:

```

> L1 Cost (L1C) = L1 price per byte of data (L1P) * Size of data to be posted in bytes (L1S)

Reviewer: can either try to explain here or just lean on linking to https://developer.arbitrum.io/arbos/l1-pricing and include the word "estimate" here

```

To calculate the buffer, that cost is divided by the L2 Gas Price.

```
Extra Buffer (B) = L1 Cost (L1C) / L2 Gas Price (P)
```

Finally, using all these elements, the formula can be written as follows:

```
TXFEES = P * (L2G + ((L1P * L1S) / P))
```

## Where do we get all this information from?

We will use two resources available in Arbitrum: the [ArbGasInfo](https://arbiscan.io/address/0x000000000000000000000000000000000000006c) precompile and the [NodeInterface](https://developer.arbitrum.io/arbos/gas#nodeinterfacesol).

- P (L2 Gas Price) ⇒ Price to pay for each gas unit. It starts at 0.1 gwei and can increase depending on the demand for network resources.

>     - Call `ArbGasInfo.getPricesInWei()` and get the sixth element

Reviewer: these 3 all return the same value, right? As below, I think it's best to just include one method

- L1S (Size of data to be posted on L1, in bytes) ⇒ This will depend on the data of the transaction. Keep in mind that Arbitrum adds a fixed amount to this number to make up for the static part of the transaction, which is also posted on L1 (140 bytes).
    - For Arbitrum Nova (AnyTrust), the size of the data is also a fixed value, as only the Data Availability Certificate is posted on L1, [as explained here](https://developer.arbitrum.io/inside-anytrust#data-availability-certificates).

## An example of how to apply this formula in your code

Finally, we show an example of how to get the values we just described and how to estimate the gas usage of a transaction in Javascript. We will use our [SDK](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/arbitrum-sdk) to connect to `ArbGasInfo` and `NodeInterface`.

We first instantiate a factory object for ArbGasInfo and NodeInterface, using two methods from the SDK. `l2Provider` is a regular JSON RPC provider for the L2 network we are using, and both `ARB_GAS_INFO` and `NODE_INTERFACE_ADDRESS` are the addresses of the precompiles in said network.

> ```ts

Reviewer: maybe we include the sdk imports in the snippet ? (for ArbGasInfo__factory and NodeInterface__factory)?

// Instantiation the ArbGasInfo and NodeInterface objects
const arbGasInfo = ArbGasInfo__factory.connect(

>     ARB_GAS_INFO,

Reviewer: let's either hardcode the ArbGasInfo address or import it form the sdk (likewise with the NodeInterface address)

---
id: how-to-estimate-gas
title: "How to estimate gas in Arbitrum"
description: Learn how to estimate gas before submitting transactions.

> author: TucksonDev

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
author: TucksonDev
content-type: how-to
```

no action required, just a future optimization - explicitly identifying a single content type can help us apply patterns and principles per type (like validating a schema)

---

import PublicPreviewBannerPartial from '../partials/_public-preview-banner-partial.md'; 

<PublicPreviewBannerPartial />

> This how-to is intended for users and developers who want to understand how gas is calculated in Arbitrum, and how it can be estimated before submitting transactions. More information about the theory behind these calculations can be found in this [Medium article](https://medium.com/offchainlabs/understanding-arbitrum-2-dimensional-fees-fd1d582596c9) and the [Gas and Fees](/arbos/gas) page. 

Reviewer 2: no action required, just a future optimization - explicitly identifying a single target audience can help us cater to specific audience needs. Eg content for nontechnical users will differ significantly from content for devs (who have different prior knowledge / experience). 

We can try to normalize a pattern by which every document specifies a single `content-type` and `target-audience` to integrate this mechanism into our info architecture / content structure :).

```
Transaction fees (TXFEES) = L2 Gas Price (P) * Gas Limit (G)
```

This Gas Limit includes the gas of the L2 computation and an additional buffer to cover the L1 gas to be paid by the Sequencer when [posting the batch including this transaction on L1](/inside-arbitrum-nitro/#how-the-sequencer-publishes-the-sequence).

```
Gas Limit (G) = Gas used on L2 (L2G) + Extra Buffer for L1 cost (B)
```

This buffer takes into account the cost of posting the transaction, batched and compressed, on L1. The L1 estimated posting cost is calculated by multiplying these two values:
- L1S, which estimates the amount of data the transaction will take up in the batch by compressing the transaction with Brotli.
- L1P, which is the L2's estimated view of the current L1's price of data (per byte), which the L2 dynamically adjusts over time.

More information is available [in this page](/arbos/l1-pricing).

```
L1 Estimated Cost (L1C) = L1 price per byte of data (L1P) * Size of data to be posted in bytes (L1S)
```

To calculate the buffer, that estimated cost is divided by the L2 Gas Price.

```
Extra Buffer (B) = L1 Estimated Cost (L1C) / L2 Gas Price (P)
```

> Finally, using all these elements, the formula can be written as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, using all of the above elements, the formula can be written as follows:
```

```
TXFEES = P * (L2G + ((L1P * L1S) / P))
```

## Where do we get all this information from?

We will use two resources available in Arbitrum: the [ArbGasInfo](https://arbiscan.io/address/0x000000000000000000000000000000000000006c) precompile and the [NodeInterface](/arbos/gas#nodeinterfacesol).

- P (L2 Gas Price) ⇒ Price to pay for each gas unit. It starts at 0.1 gwei on Arbitrum One (0.01 gwei on Arbitrum Nova) and can increase depending on the demand for network resources.

>     - Call `ArbGasInfo.getPricesInWei()` and get the sixth element

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Call `ArbGasInfo.getPricesInWei()` and get the sixth element.
```

- L2G (Gas used on L2) ⇒ Gas used to compute the transaction on L2. This does not include the “*posting on L1”* part of the calculations. The value of L2G will depend on the transaction itself, but having the data of the transaction, we can calculate it as follows:
    - Call `NodeInterface.GasEstimateComponents()` with the transaction data and subtract the second element (`gasEstimateForL1`, which estimates the L1 part of the fees) from the first (`gasEstimate`, which includes both the L1 and the L2 parts).
- L1P (L1 estimated price per byte of data) ⇒ Estimated cost of posting 1 byte of data on L1:

>     - Call `ArbGasInfo.getPricesInWei()` and get the second element

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Call `ArbGasInfo.getPricesInWei()` and get the second element.
```

## An example of how to apply this formula in your code

Finally, we show an example of how to get the values we just described and how to estimate the gas usage of a transaction in Javascript. We will use our [SDK](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/arbitrum-sdk) to connect to `ArbGasInfo` and `NodeInterface`.

We first instantiate a factory object for ArbGasInfo and NodeInterface, using two methods from the SDK. `l2Provider` is a regular JSON RPC provider for the L2 network we are using, and both `ARB_GAS_INFO` and `NODE_INTERFACE_ADDRESS` are the addresses of the precompiles in said network.

```ts
const { ArbGasInfo__factory } = require("@arbitrum/sdk/dist/lib/abi/factories/ArbGasInfo__factory");
const { NodeInterface__factory } = require("@arbitrum/sdk/dist/lib/abi/factories/NodeInterface__factory");
const { ARB_GAS_INFO, NODE_INTERFACE_ADDRESS } = require("@arbitrum/sdk/dist/lib/dataEntities/constants");

...

// Instantiation the ArbGasInfo and NodeInterface objects
const arbGasInfo = ArbGasInfo__factory.connect(
    ARB_GAS_INFO,
    l2Provider
);
const nodeInterface = NodeInterface__factory.connect(
    NODE_INTERFACE_ADDRESS,
    l2Provider
);
```

> For this example, we will use the method `ArbGasInfo.getPricesInWei()` and `NodeInterface.gasEstimateComponents()` to get all the information we need. For the gasEstimateComponents() call we will pass a destinationAddress (might be any address) and the data we want to send, to get results as accurate as possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this example, we'll use the method `ArbGasInfo.getPricesInWei()` and `NodeInterface.gasEstimateComponents()` to get the information we need. For the `gasEstimateComponents()` call, we'll pass a `destinationAddress` (this can be any address) and the data we want to send.
```

meta -> 

 - conversational tone can help keep readers in flow; contractions can help with conversational tone
 - consistent application of ticks for code formatting
 - cutting some copy that doesn't add value (accuracy is implied, but let's riff on this if I'm misunderstanding the intent)

```ts
// Getting the gas prices from ArbGasInfo.getPricesInWei()
const gasComponents = await arbGasInfo.callStatic.getPricesInWei();

// And the estimations from NodeInterface.GasEstimateComponents()
const gasEstimateComponents = await nodeInterface.callStatic.gasEstimateComponents(
    destinationAddress,
    false,
    txData
);
```

> With this, we can now get the values of the 4 variables we will use in our formula.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this, we can now get the values of the 4 variables we'll use in our formula:
```

I'll do periodic scans for this type of editorial consistency, eg:

 - using conversational language / contractions
 - using colons to explicitly connect "this thing" to "the next thing"

```ts
// Setting the variables of the formula
const P = gasComponents[5];
const L2G = gasEstimateComponents[0].sub(gasEstimateComponents[1]);
const L1P = gasComponents[1];
const L1S = 140 + txDataLengthInBytes;
```

And finally, we estimate the transaction fees applying the formula described in the beginning.

```ts
// L1C (L1 Cost) = L1P * L1S
const L1C = L1P.mul(L1S);

// B (Extra Buffer) = L1C / P
const B = L1C.div(P);

// G (Gas Limit) = L2G + B
const G = L2G.add(B);

// TXFEES (Transaction fees) = P * G
const TXFEES = P.mul(G);
```

> You can also see a working example of this code in [our tutorials repository](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/arbitrum-tutorials/tree/master/packages/gas-estimation).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Refer to [our tutorials repository](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/arbitrum-tutorials/tree/master/packages/gas-estimation) for a working example of this code.
```

Editing for succinctness. We'll want to update this to refer to the repo as the `Samples repository` when we make that change.

## Other practical ways of estimating gas costs in your code

Instead of going through the formula, we can also use the following methods to easily estimate gas costs:

- We can call an Arbitrum node’s `eth_estimateGas` to get the gas limit of the transaction. We would then need to multiply that amount by the L2 gas price, which we can get by calling `eth_gasPrice`.
- When working with L1 to L2 messages (also known as [Retryable tickets](/arbos/l1-to-l2-messaging)), we can use the function [L1ToL2MessageGasEstimator.estimateAll()](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/arbitrum-sdk/blob/main/src/lib/message/L1ToL2MessageGasEstimator.ts#L215) of the SDK or [NodeInterface.estimateRetryableTicket()](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/master/nodeInterface/NodeInterface.go#L120) to get all the gas information needed to send the transaction.

## Final note

> Always keep in mind that this calculations are just an estimate and they might not be exactly what the transaction needs to pay for gas fees.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that gas estimations from the above techniques are approximate and the actual gas fees may differ. We encourage developers to set this expectation explicitly wherever this information is shared with end-users.
```
